MATHEMATICS-I		
transformations,	integrals	dependent	on	parameters	-	
applications.	
Differential	Calculus	(Functions	of	one	Variable):		
Rolle’s	theorem	
Cauchy’s	mean	value	theorem	(Lagrange’s	mean	value	
theorem	as	a	special	case)	Taylor’s	and	Maclaurin’s	
theorems	with	remainders	Indeterminate	forms,		
Concavity	and	convexity	of	a	curve,	Points	of	inflexion,	
Asymptotes	and	Curvature.	
Differential	Calculus	(Functions	of	several	variables):		
Limit,	continuity	and	differentiability	of	functions	of	
several	variables	Partial	derivatives	and	their	geometrical	
interpretation,	differentials,	derivatives	of	composite	and	
implicit	functions,	derivatives	of	higher	order	and	their	
commutativity	Euler’s	theorem	on	homogeneous	
functions,	harmonic	functions	Taylor’s	expansion	of	
functions	of	several	variablesMaxima	and	minima	of	
functions	of	several	variables	–	Lagrange’s	method	of	
multipliers.	
Ordinary	Differential	Equations:		
First	order	differential	equations	-	exact,	linear	and	
Bernoulli	s	form	Second	order	differential	equations	with	
constant	coefficients	Method	of	variation	of	parameters	
General	linear	differential	equations	with	constant	
coefficients	Euler’s	equations	System	of	differential	
equations.	
Sequences	and	Series	:		
Sequences	and	their	limits	Convergence	of	series	
Comparison	test,	Ratio	test,	Root	test,	Absolute	and	
conditional	convergence,	alternating	series	Power	series.	
Complex	Variables:		
Limit,	continuity,	differentiability	and	analyticity	of	
functions		Cauchy-Riemann	equations,	line	integrals	in	
complex	plane,	Cauchy’s	integral	theorem	Independence	
of	path,	existence	of	indefinite	integral,	Cauchy	s	integral	
formula,	derivatives	of	analytic	functions,	Taylor	s	series,	
Laurent	s	series,		Zeros	and	singularities,	Residue	theorem,	
evaluation	of	real	integrals.	
MATHEMATICS-II		
Linear	Algebra:	Algebra	of	matrices.	Vector	spaces	-	linear	
dependence	of	vectors,	basis,	linear	transformations,	rank	
and	inverse	of	a	matrix,	solution	of	algebraic	equations	-	
consistency	conditions,	Hermitian,	skew	Hermitian	and	
unitary	matrices,	bilinear	forms,	eigenvalues	and	
eigenvectors.		Numerical	solution	of	system	of	linear	
equations	â	Gauss,	Gauss-Jordan	elimination	and	Gauss
Seidel	iteration	methods.	
Integral	Calculus:	Fundamental	theorem	of	integral	
calculus,	mean	value	theorems,	evaluation	of	definite	
integrals	-	reduction	formulae.	Convergence	of	improper	
integrals,	tests	of	convergence,	Beta	and	Gamma	functions	–	elementary	properties.	Differentiation	under	integral	
sign,	differentiation	of	integrals	with	variable	limits	-	
Leibnitz	rule.	Rectification,	double	and	triple	integrals,	
computations	of	area,	surfaces	and	volumes,	change	of	
variables	in	double	integrals	-	Jacobians	of	
Vector	Calculus:	Scalar	and	vector	fields,	level	surfaces,	
directional	derivative,	Gradient,	Curl,	Divergence,	
Laplacian,	line	and	surface	integrals,	theorems	of	Green,	
Gauss	and	Stokes,	line	integrals	independent	of	path.	
Numerical	Analysis:	Finite	differences,	Newtons	forward	
and	backward	interpolation	formulae,	central	difference	
interpolation	formulae.	Trapezoidal	and	Simpsons	1/3rd	
rules	for	numerical	integration.	Solution	of	polynomial	and	
transcendental	equations	-	bisection,	Newton-Raphson	
and	regula-falsi	methods.	
PROGRAMMING	AND	DATA	STRUCTURE		
Introduction	to	digital	computers;	introduction	to	
programming	â	variables,	assignments;	expressions;	
input/output;	conditionals	and	branching;	iteration;	
functions;	recursion;	arrays;	introduction	to	pointers;	
character	strings;	time	and	space	requirements;	searching	
and	sorting;	structures;	introduction	to	data-procedure	
encapsulation;	dynamic	allocation;	linked	structures;	
introduction	to	data	structures	â	stacks	and	queues.(A	
programming	language	like	C/C++	may	be	used	as	a	basis	
language.	The	same	language	must	be	used	for	the	
laboratory).	
DESIGN	&	ANALYSIS	OF	ALGORITHMS		
Prerequisite:	Programming	and	Data	Structures	
Basic	concepts	of	algorithms,	Complexity,	Asymptotic	
notations,	Trees:	Binary	tree,	Binary	Search	Tree,	Tree	
traversals.	Heap	as	data	structure.	Basic	sorting	
algorithms:	selection	sort,	insertion	sort.	Greedy	
algorithms:	Coin	change	problem,	activity	selection,	
Minimum	Spanning	Tree,	Single	source	shortest	path,	
knapsack	problem.	Divide	–	and	–	Conquer	technique:	
Merge	sort,	quick	sort.	Solving	Recurrence	relations.	
Dynamic	programming:	matrix	chain	multiplication,	all	pair	
shortest	path	algorithm,	0-1	Knapsack.	Graph	algorithms:	
Warshall’s	algorithm,	Depth	First	Search,	Breadth	First	
Search.	Height	Balanced	Tree.	Branch	and	Bound	
technique,	Backtracking.	NP	completeness.	
TRANSFORM	CALCULUS		
Laplace	Transform	:		Definition	of	Laplace	Transform,	
linearity	property,	
conditions	for	existence	of	Laplace	Transform.	First	and	
second	shifting	properties,	Laplace	Transform	of	
derivatives	and	integrals,	unit	step	functions,	Dirac	delta
function,	error	function.	Differentiation	and	integration	of	
transforms,	convolution	theorem,	inversion,	periodic	
functions.Evaluation	of	integrals	by	Laplace	Transform.	
Solution	of	initial	and	boundary	value	problems.		Fourier	
Series	:	Periodic	functions,	Fourier	series	representation	of	
a	function,		half	range	series,		sine	and	cosine	series,	
Fourier	integral	formula,	Parseval’s	identity.	Fourier	
Transform:	Fourier	Transform,	Fourier	sine	and	cosine	
transforms.	Linearity,	scaling,	frequency	shifting	and	time	
shifting	properties.	Self	reciprocity	of	Fourier	Transform,	
convolution	theorem.	Applications	to	boundary	value	
problems.	Brief	Introduction	of	Z-Transform,	Mellin	
transform		and	Wavelet	Transform.		
PARTIAL	DIFFERENTIAL	EQUATIONS		
Review	of	power	series	solution	of	ODE,	Frobenius	series,	
Bessel	functions	and	Legendre	polynomials.	
Introduction	to	partial	differential	equations,	linear	and	
quasi-linear	equations	of	first	order.		Classification	of	
integrals.	Lagrange’s	Method	of	solution	and	its	
geometrical	interpretation,	compatibility	condition,	
Charpits	method,	special	types	of	first	order	equations.	
Second		order	partial	differential	equations	with	constant	
and	variable	coefficients,	classification	and	reduction	of	
second	order	equation	to	canonical	form.,	characteristics.	
Cauchy	problem,	Cauchy’s,	Neumann	and	Dirichlet	
problems.	Fourier	series	solution	of	wave	equation,	
vibrations	of	a	string.	Riemann’s	method	for	hyperbolic	
equation.	Method	of	separation	of	variables	to	solve	heat	
equation,	Laplace	equation,	Diffusion	equation.	Integral	
transform	method	to	solve	second	order	partial	
differential	equations.	
PROBABILITY	&	STATISTICS		
Probability:	Classical,	relative	frequency	and	axiomatic	
definitions	of	probability,	addition	rule	and	conditional	
probability,	multiplication	rule,	total	probability,	Bayes’	
Theorem	and	independence.Random	Variables:	Discrete,	
continuous	and	mixed	random	variables,	probability	mass,	
probability	density	and	cumulative	distribution	functions,	
mathematical	expectation,	moments,	moment	generating	
function,	Chebyshev’s	inequality.	Special	Distributions:	
Discrete	uniform,	Binomial,	Geometric,	Poisson	
,Exponential,	Gamma,	Normal	distributions.	Functions	of	a	
Random	Variable.	Joint	Distributions:	Joint,	marginal	and	
conditional	distributions,	product	moments,	correlation,	
independence	of	random	variables,	bivariate	normal	
distribution.				Sampling	Distributions:	The	Central	Limit	
Theorem,	distributions	of	the	sample	mean	and	the	
sample	variance	for	a	normal	population,	Chi-Square,	t	and	
F	distributions.	Estimation:	The	method	of	moments	and	
the	method	of	maximum	likelihood	estimation,	confidence	
intervals	for	the	mean(s)	and	variance(s)	of	normal	
populations.	Testing	of	Hypotheses:	Null	and	alternative	
hypotheses,	the	critical	and	acceptance	regions,	two	types	
of	error,	power	of	the	test,	the	most	powerful	test	and	
Neyman-Pearson	Fundamental	Lemma,	tests	for	one	
sample	problems	for	normal	populations.			
NUMERICAL	SOLUTION	OF	ORDINARY	AND	PDE		
Ordinary	Differential	Equations:	Numerical	solutions	of	IVP	-	Difference	equations,	stability,	error	and	convergence	
analysis.	Single	step	methods	-	Taylor	series	method,	Euler	
method,	Picardâs	method	of	successive	approximation,	
Runge	Kutta	Method.	Multi	step	methods	-	Predictor
Corrector	method,	Euler	PC	method,	Milne	and	Adams	
Moulton	PC	method.	System	of	first	order	ODE,	higher	
order	IVPs.	Numerical	solutions	of	BVP	-	Linear	BVP,	finite	
difference	methods,	shooting	methods,	Newtonâs	method	
for	system	of	equations,	stability,	error	and	convergence	
analysis,	non	linear	BVP,	higher	order	BVP.	Partial	
Differential	Equations:	Classification	of	PDEs,	Finite	
difference	approximations	to	partial	derivatives,	
convergence	and	stability	analysis.	Explicit	and	Implicit	
schemes	-	Crank-Nicolson	scheme,	tri-diagonal	system,	
Laplace	equation	using	standard	five	point	formula	and	
diagonal	five	point	formula.		ADI	scheme,	hyperbolic	
equation,	explicit	scheme,	method	of	characteristics.	
Solution	of	one	dimensional	heat	conduction	equation	by	
Schmidt	and	Crank	Nicolson	methods.	Solution	of	wave	
equation.	
DISCRETE	MATHEMATICS		
Cartesian	product,	relations,	domain	and	range,	
composition	of	relations,equivalence	relations,	partial	
ordering	relation.	Lattices.	Functions	-Function	as	a	
relation,	injection,	surjection	and	bijection,	composition	of	
functions,	identity	and	inverse	function.	Cardinality,	
characteristic	function.	Peano	postulates	and	finite	
induction,	example	of	proof	by	induction.	Recursive	
definitions.	Binary	operation	on	a	set,	groupoid,	
commutative	and	associative	binary	operations,	binary	
operation	with	identity.	Semigroup,	monoid.	Boolean	
algebra	-	Axioms	and	properties,	atomic	structure	of	a	
finite	Boolean	algebra.Homomorphism	and		isomorphism.	
Disjunctive	and	conjunctive	normal	forms.Algebra	of	
position.	First	order	predicate	calculus.	Theory	of	groups	-	
Axioms,properties,	subgroup,	cyclic	group,	cosets,	
Lagrange’s	theorem.	Rings,	subrings,	ideals,	ring	
homomorphism.	Finite	field	-	Field	of	order	p.	(p	is	
prime).	
SOFT-	COMPUTING	TOOLS	IN	ENGINEERING		
Fuzzy	Logic,	Genetic	Algorithm,	Neural	Networks	and	
Probabilistic	Reasoning;	Applications	of	Fuzzy	Logic	
concepts	in	Engineering	Problems;	Engineering	
optimization	problem	solving	using	genetic	algorithm;	
Neural	network	approaches	in	engineering	analysis,	design	
and	diagnostics	problems;	applications	of	probabilistic	
reasoning	approaches.	
OBJECT	ORIENTED	SYSTEMS	DESIGN		
Prerequisite:	Programming	and	Data	Structures		
Objects,	Classes,	object	modeling,	object	relationships;	
Static	and	dynamic	modeling,	object	oriented	language	
features;	JAVA,	UML;	Object	oriented	analysis	and	design,	
client	server	and	distributed	objects,	client	server	
implementation;	CORBA,	COM/DCOM.	
COMPUTER	ORGANISATION	&	ARCHITECTURE		
Computer	arithmetic,	point	representations,	introduction	
to	CISC	processor	architecture,	instruction	set	and	
addressing	modes.	Hardware	design	principles,	polling	of	
processors,	memory	types	and	interfacing	and	timing	I/O	
handling,	interrupts	and	DMA	and	device	interfaces-CRT,	
floppy	disk,	HDD,	optical	disk,	serial	interfaces	and	data	
acquisition,	operating	system	concepts	and	architectural	
support-	privileged	mode,	software	interrupts,	memory	
hierarchy	and	virtual	memory,	multi-processors	concept,	
cache	memory,	pipe	lining	and	introduction,	RISC	
processors,	super	scalar	processors.	Resource	scheduling	
problems-their	solutions	and	analysis,	storage	
management,	secondary	storage,	virtual	memory,	
segmentation	and	paging.	Concurrent	processes	and	their	
synchronization	abstractions.	Producer	â	consumer	
problems,	mutual	exclusion	and	dead-lock,	properties	of	
concurrent	programs,	critical	section	problem,	
semaphores,	test	and	set,	atomic	operations,	security	and	
recovery.	
MATHEMATICAL	METHODS		
Two-point	boundary-value	problems,	Green's	functions,	
Construction	of	Green's	functions,	Nonhomogeneous	
boundary	conditions,	Sturm-	Liouville	Systems,	Eigen	
values	and	Eigen	functions,	Eigenfunction	expansions	and	
completeness.;		Hypergeometric	equation	and	functions,	
Properties	of	hypergeometric	functions,	Legendre	
equation	and	Legendre	polynomial,	Generating	function	
for	Legendre	polynomial,	Recurrence	relations	between	
Legendre	polynomials,Rodrigueâs	formula.	Orthogonality	
of	Legendre	polynomial,	Associated	Legendre	equation	
and	Legendre	function,	Bessel	equation	and	its	solution,	
Bessel	functions,	Modified	Bessel	function,	Generating	
function	for	Bessel	function,	Recurrence	relations	between	
Bessel	functions,	Orthogonality	of	Bessel	functions.;		
Autonomous	systems,	Stability	for	Linear	systems	with	
constant	coefficients,	Linear	plane	autonomous	systems,	
perturbed	systems,	Method	of	Lyapunov	for	nonlinear	
systems.	Limit	cycles	of	Poincare.;	Coordinate	
transformations,	Definition	of	Tensors,	Summation	
convention,	Kronecker	Delta,	Covariant,	contravariant	and	
mixed	tensors.	Fundamental	operations	with	tensors,	the	
line	element	and	metric	tensor,	length	of	a	vector,	
Christoffelâs	symbols,	the	covariant	derivative,	tensor	
form	of	gradient,	divergence	and	curl.	Examples	from	
continuum	mechanics,	elasticity,	plasticity,	fluids	
LINEAR	ALGEBRA		
Vector	spaces	over	any	arbitrary	field,	linear	combination,	
linear	dependence	and	independence,	basis	and	
dimension,	inner-product	spaces,	linear	transformations,	
matrix	representation	of	linear	transformations,	linear	
functional,	dual	spaces,	eigen	values	and	eigen	vectors,	
rank	and	nullity,	inverse	and	linear	transformation,	Cayley
Hamilton	Theorem,	norms	of	vectors	and	matrices,	
transformation	of	matrices,	adjoint	of	an	operator,	
normal,	unitary,	hermitian	and	skew-hermitian	operators,	
quadratic	forms.	
REAL	ANALYSIS		
Dedekindâs	definition	of	real	numbers,	field	and	order	
axioms,	countable	and	uncountable	sets,	supremum	and	
infimum	of	sets	of	real	numbers,	bounds	and	limit	points	
of	a	set,	Bolzano-Weierstrass	theorem,	open	and	closed	
sets.	Limit	inferior,	limit	superior	and	limit	of	sequence,	
bounded	and	monotonic	sequences,	Cauchy	sequence	and	
Cauchyâs	general	principle	of	convergence,	product	and	
quotient	of	limits,	Cantorâs	theorem	on	nested	interval	
and	its	applications.	Compact	sets,	Heine-Borel	theorem.	
Limit,	limit	superior,	limit	inferior	of	real	functions,	limit	
theorems.	Continuity	and	uniform	continuity	of	real	
functions,	properties	of	continuous	functions,	continuity	
and	compactness.	Differentiability	of	real	functions,	
Taylor's	and	Maclaurinâs	theorems.	Riemann	integration,	
conditions	for	integrability,	properties	of	integrable	
functions,	indefinite	integral	and	their	properties,	
fundamental	theorem	of	integral	calculus,	mean	value	
theorems,	improper	integrals,	convergence	at	infinity,	
absolute	and	conditional	convergence.	Sequences	and	
series	of	functions,	uniform	convergence	of	sequences	and	
series	of	functions.	Cantorâs	definition	of	real	numbers.	
Metric	sets:	Definition,	real	line	as	an	example	of	a	metric	
set.	
OPERATION	RESEARCH		
Baseline	model,	linear	programming	problem,	convex	sets,	
convex	functions	and	their	properties,	basic	feasible	
solution,	optimal	solution,	related	theorems.	
Graphical	method	for	solving	two	and	three	variable	
problems,	simplex	method,	Big	M	method,	degenerate	LP	
problem,	product	form	of	inverse	of	a	matrix,	
revised	simplex	method,	duality	theorems,	
complementary	slackness	principle,	primal-dual	simplex	
algorithm,	sensitivity	analysis,	parametric	programming,	
linear	integer	programming	problem,	Gomory	cutting	
plane	method,	branch	and	bound	algorithm,	0-1	implicit	
enumeration,	transportation	problem,	assignment	
problem	with	their	solution	methodologies.	Theory	of	
games,	two-person	zero-sum	games	with	and	without	
saddle-points,	pure	and	mixed	strategies,	graphical	
method	of	solution	of	a	2ï	́n	game,	solution	of	an	mï	́n	
game	by	simplex	method.	
MODERN	ALGEBRA		
Groups,	subgroups,cyclic	groups,cosets,	Lagrange	
theorem.	Normal	subgroup,	quotient	group;	
homomorphism,	fundamental	theorem	of	
FUNCTIONAL	ANALYSIS		
homomorphism;	permutation	group,	Cayley’s	theorem;	
direct	product	of	group.	Cummutative	ring	with	identity:	
Axioms,	examples,	integral	domain;	field,	ideals,	quotient	
ring,	prime	and	maximal	ideal,	principal	ideal	domain;	
Euclidean	domain,	the	field	of	quotients	of	an	integral	
domain;	polynomial	ring	over	a	field.	Roots	of	polynomials,	
extension	of	fields,	splitting	fields.	
MEASURE	THEORY	AND	INTEGRATION		
Prerequisite:	Real	Analysis	
Algebra	of	sets,	ring,	sigma-ring,	field	and	sigma	field	of	
sets,	monotone	class,	Lebesgue	measure	and	outer	
measure,	measurable	sets,	measurable	functions,	
Littlewoods	three	principles,	existence	of	non-measurable	
set.	Lebesgue	integral	of	a	bounded	function	over	a	set	of	
finite	measure,	the	integral	of	a	non-negative	function,	
general	Lebesgue	integral,	convergence	in	measure,	
functions	of	bounded	variation,	absolute	continuity,	
differentiation	and	integration,	general	measure	and	
integration,	signed	measure,	Hahn-Jordan	decomposition,	
Radon-Nikodym	and	Lebesgue	decomposition	theorems,	
product	measures	and	Fubinis	theorem.	Lp	spaces,	
Minkowski	and		Holder	inequalities,	convergence	and	
completeness	approximation	in	Lp	,	bounded	linear	
functionals	on	Lp	spaces.	
SWITCHING	&	FINITE	AUTOMATA		
Codes,	switching	algebra,	minimization	and	decomposition	
of	switching	functions,	Karnaugh	map,	digital	circuits,	
logical	gates		-	AND,	OR,	NAND,	NOR	etc.,	combinatorial	
logic,	threshold	logic,	fault	diagnosis,	sequential	machines	-	synchronous	and	asynchronous	circuits,	basic	flip-flops	-	
SR	flip-flop,	T	flip-flop,	JK		flip-flop,				flip-flop,	clocked	and	
master-	slave	flip-flop,	decoder,	multiplexer	circuits,	
counters	-		synchronous	and	asynchronous,	sequence	
detector,	parity-bit	generator,	registers,	shift	registers,	
minimization	and	transformation	of	sequential	machines,	
turing	machines.	
ADVANCED	NUMERICAL	TECHNIQUES		
Revision	of	IVP,	single-step	and	multi-step	methods.	
System	of	first	order	ODE,	higher	order	IVPs.	Numerical	
solutions	of	BVP	-	Linear	BVP,	finite	difference	methods,	
shooting	methods,	stability,	error	and	convergence	
analysis,	non	linear	BVP,	higher	order	BVP.			Classification	
of	PDEs,	Finite	difference	approximations	to	partial	
derivatives,	convergence	and	stability	analysis.	Explicit	and	
Implicit	schemes	-	Crank-Nicolson	scheme,	tri-diagonal	
system,	Laplace	equation	using	standard	five	point	formula	
and	diagonal	five	point	formula.		ADI	scheme,	hyperbolic	
equation,	explicit	scheme,	method	of	characteristics.	
Solution	of	one	dimensional	heat	conduction	equation	by	
Schmidt	and	Crank	Nicolson	methods.	Solution	of	wave	
equation.	
Metric	spaces,	complete	metric	spaces,	Banach	
contraction	mapping	theorem.Banach	spaces,	bounded	
linear	functionals	and	bounded	linear	operators,	dual	
spaces,	Hahn-Banach	theorem,	uniform	boundedness	
principle,	open	mapping	and	closed	graph	theorems,	weak	
convergence,	Hilbert	spaces,	orthonormal	sets,	Riesz	
representation	theorem,	bounded	linear	operators	on	
Hilbert	spaces.	
SYSTEMS	PROGRAMMING		
Prerequisite:	Programming	and	Data	Structures		
Computer	structure,	data	representation,	instruction	
format,	assembly	language,	addressing	systems.	
Macrolanguage	and	macroprocessors,	concepts	and	design	
of	assemblers,	loaders,	linkage	editors.	
FLUID	MECHANICS		
Prerequisite:	PDE	Kinematics	of	Fluids	in	Motion	:	
Continuum	Hypothesis,	Lagrangian	and	Eularian	
description,	Introduction	to	stream	lines,	velocity	
potential,	vorticity	vector	etc.,	Equation	of	continuity.	
Equations	of	Motion,	Euler	s	equations	of	motion,	Bernouli	
s	equation.	Potential	flows.	Three-	dimensional	flows	:	
Singularities	and	image	systems.	Weiss	sphere	theorem,	
axi-	symmetric	flows,	Stokes	stream	function.	Two
dimensional	flows	:	stream	function	and	complex	potential	
for	two	â	dimensional,	irrotational	incompressible	flows,	
two-dimensional	image	systems,	Milne-Thomson	circle	
theorem	and	its	applications,	Blasius	theorem,	use	of	
conformal	transformations,	Kutta-	Joukowski	condition,	
Karman	vortex	street.	Viscous	flows	:	stress	analysis	in	
fluid	motion,	relations	between	stress	and	rate	of	strain,	
Navier	â	Stokes	equations	of	motion	of	a	viscous	fluid,	
some	exact	solutions	of	Navier	â	Stokes	equations,	flow	
past	a	sphere,	Prandtl	s	boundary	layer	theory,	Karman	s	
integral	equation,	inviscid	compressible	flow	-	Propagation	
of	pressure	change.	
NUMBER	THEORY		
Prerequisite:	Modern	Algebra,	Real	AnalysisPeanos	
axioms,	divisibility,properties	of	integers	and	prime	
numbers,	fundamental	theorem	of	arithmetic.	
Congruences,	solutions	of	congruences,	congruences	of	
degree	one,	congruences	of	higher	degree.	Quadratic	
residues,	quadratic	reciprocity,	Jacobi	symbol,	
greatest	integer	function,	arithmetic	functions,	the	mobius	
inversion	formula,	multiplication	of	arithmetic	functions,	
recurrence	functions,	some	Diophantine	equations,	simple	
continued	fractions,	distribution	of	primes,	algebraic	
numbers,	algebraic	number	fields,	partition	function.	
QUEUING	THEORY		
Prerequisite:	Prob.	Theory/	Prob.	and	Stats.Probability	and	
random	variable,	discrete	and	continuous	univariate	and	
multivariate	distributions,	moments,	law	
of	large	numbers	and	central	limit	theorem	(without	
proof),	Poisson	process,	birth	and	death	process,	infinite	
and	finite	queueing	models	M/M/1,	M/M/C,	M/G/1,	
M/M/1/N,	M/Ek/1,	Ek/M/1,	M/G/1/N,	GI/M/1,	priority	
queueing	models,	network	of	queues,	finite	processor	
sharing	models,	central	server	model	of	
multiprogramming,		performance	evaluation	of	systems	
using	queueing	models.	Concepts	of	bottleneck	and	
system	saturation	point.	Introduction	to	discrete	
time	queues	and	its	applications.	
REGRESSION	AND	TIME	SERIES	MODEL	
Concept	of	regression,	Simple	linear	regression,	multiple	
linear	regression,	model	adequacy	checking,	
transformations	and	weighting	to	correct	model	
inadequacies,	diagnostics	for	leverage	and	influence.	
Polynomial	regression	models,	orthogonal	polynomials.	
Classical	techniques	of	Time	Series	Analysis,	Different	
Smoothing	Techniques,	General	linear	process,	
Autoregressive	Processes	AR(P),	Moving	average	Process	
Ma(q):	Autocorrelation,	Partial	autocorrelation	and	
Spectrum,	Identification	in	time	domain,	Forecasting,	
Estimation	of	Parameters,	Model	diagnostic	checks,	
Elements	of	ARCH	and	GARCH	models,	Use	of	time	series	
techniques	in	Finance.	
STOCHASTIC	PROCESSES		
Prerequisite:	Probability	and	Statistics	Definition	and	
classification	of	stochastic	processes,	discrete	time	Markov	
chains,	random	walk,	gamblers	ruin,	branching	process,	
Poisson	process,	general	continuous	time	Markov	chains,	
birth	and	death	process,	applications	to	queues,	renewal	
process,	martingales,	Brownian	motion.	
INTEGRAL	EQUATIONS	&	VARIATIONAL	METHODS		
Integral			Equations:	Basic	concepts,	Volterra	integral	
equations,	relationship	between	linear	differential	
equations	and	Volterra	equations,	resolvent	kernel,	
method	of	successive	approximations,	convolution	type	
equations,	Volterra	equation	of	the	first	kind.	Abel	integral	
equation.	Fredholm	integral	equations,	Fredholm	
equations	of	the	second	kind,	the	method	of	Fredholm	
determinants,	iterated	kernels,	integral	equations	with	
degenerate	kernels,	eigen	values	and	eigen	functions	of	a	
Fredholmalternative,	construction	of	Green	s	function	for	
BVP,	singular	integralequations.Calculus	of	Variations:	
Euler	-	Lagrange	equations,	degenerate	Euler	equations,	
Natural	boundary	conditions,	transversality	conditions,	
simple	applications	of	variational	principle,	sufficient	
conditions	for	extremum.	Variational	formulation	of	BVP,	
minimum	of	quadratic	functional.	Approximate	methods	-	
Galerkin	s	method,	weighted-residual	methods,	Colloation	
methods.	Variational	methods	for	time	dependent	
problems.	
THEORY	OF	OPERATING		
Prerequisite:	Programming	and	Data	StructuresCPU,	
memory,	file	and	I/O	devices,	batch	processing,	resource	
scheduling	problems	-	their	solutions	and	analysis,	
storage	management,	secondary	storage,	virtual	memory,	
segmentation	and	paging.	Concurrent	processes	and	their	
synchronization	abstractions.	Producer	consumer	
problem,	mutual	exclusion	and	deadlock,	properties	of	
concurrent	programmes,	critical	section	problem,	
semaphors,	test	and	set,	atomic	operations,	security	
and	recovery.	
FILE	ORGANISATION	AND	DATA	BASE	SYSTEMS		
Prerequisite:	Programming	Languages	Database	concepts,	
entity		relationship	model,	relational	network	and	
hierarchical	data	models.	Relational	database	design,	
functional	and	multi-valued	dependency.	Normal	form,	
data	description	languages,	relational	algebra	and	calculus,	
SQL,	query	facility	and	query	optimization.		Introduction	to	
distributed	databases	implementation	issues.	
Storage	media	and	storage	structure,	file	and	index	
organization.	Heap	file,	indexed	file,	B		tree	file,	denie	
index,	file	with	variable	length	records,	performance	and	
evaluation.	
GRAPH	THEORY	AND	ALGORITHMS		
Graphs,	paths	and	circuits,	trees	and	fundamental	circuits,	
cut-sets	and	cut-vertices,	planar	and	dual	graphs,	
colouring,	covering	and	partitioning,	direct	graphs,	
enumeration	of	graphs,	graph	theoretic	algorithms	
and	applications.	
COMPUTATIONAL	STATISTICS		
Prerequisite:	Probability	and	StatisticsAnalysis	of	Variance,	
one-way	and	two-	way	classification,	Concept	of	design	of	
experiment.	Some	standard	designs:	
completely	randomized	design,	randomized	block	design,	
Latin	Squares,	Graeco	Latin	Squares,	and	factorial	designs,	
confounding	and	blocking	in	factorial	designs,	fractional	
factorial	designs.	Simple	and	multiple	regression	
models.Classical	techniques	of	time	series	analysis,	
smoothing	and	decomposition.Analysis	of	covariance	
model.	
SPEECH	&	NATURAL	LANGUAGE	PROCESSING		
Major	Components	of	the	Course	include:	
1. 
Basic	Text	Processing:	Tokenization,	Stemming	
2. 
3. 
Language	Modeling:	N-grams,	smoothing	
Morphology,	Parts	of	Speech	Tagging	
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
Syntax:	PCFGs,	Dependency	Parsing	
Distributional	Semantics	
Lexical	Semantics,	Word	Sense	Disambiguation	
Information	Extraction:	Relation	extraction,	Event	extraction	
Text	Summarization	
Text	Classification	
10. Machine	Translation	
TOPOLOGY		
Prerequisite:	Real	Analysis	
Topological	spaces,	weak	topology,	subspace	
topology,	product	and	quotient	spaces,	continuous	maps	
and	homeomorphism,	Hausdorff	spaces,	compact	and	
locally	compact	spaces,	separation	axioms,connectedness,	
paths,	equivalence	classes	of	paths,	path	connected	
spaces.	
NON	LINEAR	PROGRAMMING		
Prerequisite:	Operations	ResearchConvex	set,	Convex	
function,	Generalized	convex	functions.	Fritz	John		and	
Karush-	Kuhn	â	Tucker	optimality	condition,	duality,	
Convex	programming	problems,	Quadratic	programming,	
Fractional	programming,	Separable	programming,	Non	
linear	integer	programming.	Constrained	Optimization:	
One	dimensional	search	methods,	Multi-dimensional	
search	methods.	Unconstrained	optimization:	Conjugate	
gradient	method,	Generalized	reduced	gradient	methods,		
Method	of	feasible	direction.	
COMPUTATIONAL	LINEAR	ALGEBRA		
Basic	concepts,	floating	point	numbers	and	errors	in	
computation,	stability	of	algorithms	and	conditioning	of	
problems.	Numerical	solution	of	linear	system,	Direct	
methods	:	Gaussian	elimination	with	pivotal	condensation,	
operational	count	and	error	bound.	LU	factorization,	QR	
factorization.	Condition	number	and	ill	conditioned	
systems.	Matrix	and	vector	norms.	Error	bounds.	
Wilkinson's	algorithm	for	ill-conditioned	systems.	Iterative	
methods	:	Jacobi,	Gauss-Seidel,	SOR,	convergence	and	rate	
of	convergence,	cojugate	gradient	method,	Arnoldi	
process	and	GMRES.	Large	sparse	systems.	Matrix	inverse.	
Generalized	inverse.	Least	square	solution	of	linear	
systems.	Numerical	eigenvalue problems. 
computation of eigenvalues and	eigenvectors,	
singular	value	decomposition	and	least	square	problem,	
SVD	and	the	pseudo	inverse.	Jacobi,	Givens	&	
Householder's	method	for	symmetric	matrices,	
Hessenberg	QR	iteration	